--- PAGE 1 ---
800 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 1, MARCH 2023
DRL-Assisted Reoptimization of Network Slice
Embedding on EON-Enabled Transport Networks
Seyed Soheil Johari ,Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Sepehr Taeb, Nashid Shahriar ,Member, IEEE ,
Shihabur Rahman Chowdhury ,Student Member, IEEE , Massimo Tornatore ,Fellow, IEEE ,
Raouf Boutaba ,Fellow, IEEE , Jeebak Mitra , and Mahdi Hemmati ,Member, IEEE
Abstract —5G transport networks will support dynamic
services with diverse requirements through network slicing.Elastic Optical Networks (EONs) facilitate transport networkslicing by ﬂexible spectrum allocation and tuning of transmissionconﬁgurations. A major challenge in supporting dynamic servicesis the lack of priori knowledge of future slice requests. As a con-sequence, slice embedding can become sub-optimal over time,leading to spectrum fragmentation and skewed utilization. Thisin turn can block future slice requests, impacting operator rev-enue. To address this issue, operators can periodically re-optimizeslice embedding for reducing fragmentation. In this paper, weaddress this problem of re-optimizing network slice embeddingon EONs for minimizing fragmentation. The problem is solvedin its splittable version, which signiﬁcantly increases problemcomplexity, but also offers more opportunities for a larger setof re-conﬁguration actions. We employ simulated annealing forsystematically exploring the large solution space. We also pro-pose a greedy algorithm to address the practical constraint oflimiting the number of re-conﬁguration steps. Moreover, wepresent a novel method based on Deep Reinforcement Learning(DRL) for determining when performing re-conﬁguration is most
effective. Our extensive simulations demonstrate that the greedy
algorithm yields a solution very close to that obtained usingsimulated annealing while requiring orders of magnitude lesserre-conﬁguration actions. Finally, we show that by applying thegreedy algorithm periodically on the network according to theDRL-based time selection algorithm, a signiﬁcant improvement inthe total number of accepted slice requests can be achieved withonly performing a limited number of re-conﬁguration operations.
Index Terms —Elastic optical network, fragmentation, deep
reinforcement learning (DRL), transport network.
Manuscript received 26 July 2022; revised 10 November 2022; accepted 22
November 2022. Date of publication 3 January 2023; date of current version
7 March 2023. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article
and approving it for publication was B. Martini. (Corresponding author:
Seyed Soheil Johari.)
Seyed Soheil Johari, Sepehr Taeb, and Raouf Boutaba are with the David
R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo,
ON N2L 3G1, Canada (e-mail: ssjohari@uwaterloo.ca; staeb@uwaterloo.ca;rboutaba@uwaterloo.ca).
Nashid Shahriar is with the Department of Computer Science, University of
Regina, Regina, SK S4S 0A2, Canada (e-mail: Nashid.Shahriar@uregina.ca).
Shihabur Rahman Chowdhury was with the David R. Cheriton School of
Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, CanadaHe is now with Apple, Seattle, WA 98109 USA (e-mail: sr2chowdhury@
uwaterloo.ca).
Massimo Tornatore is with the Department of Electronics, Information
and Bioengineering, Politecnico di Milano, 20133 Milan, Italy (e-mail:massimo.tornatore@polimi.it).
Jeebak Mitra and Mahdi Hemmati are with the Ottawa Optical
Systems Competency Centre, Huawei Technologies Canada ResearchCenter, Ottawa, ON K2K 3J1, Canada (e-mail: jeebak.mitra@huawei.com;
mahdi.hemmati@huawei.com).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TNSM.2022.3230381I. I NTRODUCTION
TRANSPORT networks are evolving to support dynamic
and short-lived services with diverse quality of ser-
vice (QoS) requirements [ 1], [2], [3], such as enhanced
mobile broadband and ultra-reliable low-latency communi-cation [ 4] through 5G network slicing [ 5]. This evolution
towards network slicing is being fueled by recent advances
in Elastic Optical Network (EON) virtualization [ 5], [6], as
EONs support ﬁner-grained spectrum allocation and tuning oftransmission conﬁgurations (such as modulation format, for-
ward error correction (FEC) overhead, and baudrate) that allow
to rightsize EON resource allocation to network slices [ 7], [8].
Hence, EON-enabled transport networks can leverage theirﬂexible resource allocation capabilities to offer to customers
tailored and dynamic network slices, typically in terms of a
virtual networks (VN) consisting of virtual nodes connectedby virtual links.
A key challenge in supporting dynamic services with short
lifetime through network slicing is how to deal with the lack
of a priori knowledge of slice arrivals and departures. Withoutsuch knowledge, it has been observed that slice resource allo-cation becomes sub-optimal over time, and, in the speciﬁc
case of EONs, underlying spectrum resources become frag-
mented and capacity utilization becomes skewed [ 9], [10].
Such imbalanced and fragmented spectrum utilization canresult in blocking future VN requests [ 9]. For these reasons, it
is essential to re-optimize resources allocated to VNs to mini-
mize fragmentation, ensuring optimal resource utilization, andmaking room for future VN requests.
In this paper, we address the problem of re-optimizing
network slice or VN embedding on an EON. VN embedding
on EON involves allocating spectrum resources to a VN bymapping the virtual nodes and virtual links on EON nodes
and paths with appropriate transmission conﬁguration [ 7].
Among the possible objectives, we focus on reducing spec-trum fragmentation through re-optimization of VN embedding.
Defragmentation is considered crucial for network opera-
tors and has attracted remarkable attention in research [ 9].
Since minimizing fragmentation alone may lead to unbounded
increase in spectrum usage, we measure to limit additional
spectrum usage during defragmentation, which adds additional
challenge to the re-optimization problem. While solving the
network slice embedding re-optimization problem, we onlyconsider modifying virtual link embedding, as virtual nodes of
a network slice typically have location constraints (e.g., they
1932-4537 c/circlecopyrt2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 10:44:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 2 ---
JOHARI et al.: DRL-ASSISTED REOPTIMIZATION OF NETWORK SLICE EMBEDDING 801
are mapped to an EON node equipped with compute resources
located at a metro data center (MDC) or a Point-of-Presence(PoP) site).
Moreover, re-optimization of VN embedding needs to
be invoked multiple times during network operation, anddetermining the most appropriate times for invoking the re-
optimization is necessary for decreasing VN blocking with
minimal operational complexity. In other words, not per-forming re-optimization can result in severe VN blocking,
whereas invoking re-optimization too often will cause unnec-
essary operational complexity. We propose to utilize DeepReinforcement Learning (DRL) for selecting the times for per-
forming re-optimization. DRL has shown to be very successful
for maximizing both current and future rewards simultaneously
in many decision-making applications where there are no prior
knowledge about the behavior of the environment [ 11], [12].
Even though Virtual Network Embedding (VNE) related
problems have been thoroughly investigated in the past, espe-
cially in IP networks, investigation of the same problem in theoptical layer is less extensive, and in particular, recent devel-
opment of sliceable transponders [ 13] and splitting-enabled
EON [ 14] to support massive bandwidth requests has increased
the complexity of the problem [ 8]. This has motivated us to
devise a new methodology to address the increased complex-
ity of the VNE-related problems. So, we signiﬁcantly differfrom the research literature in optical network defragmenta-
tion on several aspects. First, we consider the possibility of
splitting a virtual link demand on multiple continuous and con-tiguous spectrum allocations (called splits) over one or more
substrate EON path(s) (similar to [ 8], [14]). Second, we do not
assume the existence of any special technology ( e.g., push-
pull [ 15] and hop-retuning [ 16]) for performing disruption
free defragmentation. We assume the capabilities of commer-cial transponders and adopt make-before-break [17] approach
whenever possible.
We quantify spectrum fragmentation using the root mean
square fragmentation (RMSF) metric [ 18], which is non-
linear. Due to the non-linearity of our objective function of
RMSF, it becomes infeasible to use standard integer/mixed-integer programming modeling tools to obtain optimal solution
even for very small problem instances. Therefore, we lever-
age Simulated Annealing (SA) search [ 19] to systematically
explore a large solution space for obtaining an estimation of
a loose lower bound of RMSF. One advantage of using SA
is that the search process naturally yields the sequence ofactions that must be taken to bring the network to the com-
puted re-optimized state. However, it may arrive at the ﬁnal
defragmented state by applying a excessively large numberof re-conﬁguration actions on the network, which might be
undesirable from a network operator’s perspective. Hence, we
also devise a greedy search heuristic that navigates through
the solution space with a given budget on the number of
possible actions. To the best of our knowledge, this aspectof defragmentation was not studied before in the context of
splitting-enabled EON. Our extensive evaluation using real
network topologies demonstrates that the greedy search pro-cess reduces network defragmentation nearly to the sameextent as the SA search, while applying orders of magni-
tude lesser number of reconﬁguration actions. For determiningthe best times to perform re-optimization, we train a Soft
Q-Network model [ 20] as a DRL agent that in each con-
sidered time step, intelligently decides whether to invoke there-optimization process or not.
This paper is an extended version of the work presented
in [21]. With respect to a SA and a greedy algorithm in [ 21],
we analyze the effect of applying re-optimization on increas-
ing the EON’s ability to accept more VN requests. Moreover,
we propose a novel DRL-based algorithm for resolving thetrade-off between increase in the number of accepted VNs
and total number of performed re-optimization operations in
an intelligent manner. Through extensive experiments, we
demonstrate the superiority of our DRL-based method com-
pared to other alternative strategies and also evaluate thegeneralization capability of the DRL method for VN request
distributions that signiﬁcantly differ from those seen during
training. Finally, we expand our discussion of the related worksand the experimental results.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst dis-
cuss the related works in Section II. Then, we discuss our
choice of fragmentation metric and re-conﬁguration actions,
followed by a formal problem deﬁnition in Section III.
In Section IV, we present our SA algorithm for re-
optimizing VN embedding over an EON. Our greedy search
approach with a bounded number of re-conﬁguration actions
is presented in Section V, and the DRL-based time selec-
tion strategy for invoking the re-optimization operations is
presented in Section VI. Evaluation results are presented in
Section VII. We conclude with some future research directions
in Section VIII.
II. R ELATED WORKS
EON spectrum defragmentation strategies fall into two
broad categories, namely, proactive and reactive [ 9]. Proactive
approaches are executed periodically or when fragmentation
level reaches a pre-deﬁned threshold [ 22]. In contrast, reactive
approaches defragment spectrum resources when the embed-
ding of a new VN is blocked due to fragmentation and can
make room for the newly arrived VN [ 23]. However, there
is no guarantee that reactive defragmentation will be suc-
cessful and it may result in sub-optimal embedding for the
VNs that are migrated during the process. Another line ofwork for EON defragmentation is fragmentation-aware VN
embedding [ 24], [25]. Fragmentation awareness is achieved by
embedding new VNs in a way to reduce spectrum fragmenta-tion. Fragmentation-aware embedding may not be sufﬁcient
to defragment an entire EON since such embedding only
concerns fragmentation around the new VN. In contrast, proac-
tive defragmentation accounts for all VNs and EON links,
and offers more opportunities to re-optimize VN embeddings.Hence, in this paper, we focus on proactive defragmenta-
tion by changing the route and/or the spectrum allocation
of connections. While doing so, existing approaches assumethe availability of techniques, such as push-pull or hop
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 10:44:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
802 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 1, MARCH 2023
re-tuning, that promises to reconﬁgure spectrum allocation
without causing any trafﬁc disruption [ 26], [27]. However,
these technologies are still experimental and are not available
in commercial equipment. Conversely, we do not assume any
speciﬁc technology for eliminating disruption and adopt themake-before-break approach whenever possible [ 17].
Shakya and Cao proposed a defragmentation approach
in [28] that minimizes the maximum used spectrum slot
index on any EON link. This objective may not be use-
ful since many fragmented spectrum blocks can exist on a
link even when maximum slot index is low. Dávalos et al.presented two metaheuristic-based algorithms for selecting
lighpaths that need to be reconﬁgured for defragmenta-
tion [ 29]. This approach does not generate the order in which
lightpaths should be re-conﬁgured that we address in this
paper. Comellas et al. [ 22] evaluated several ordering strategies
for reconﬁguring lightpaths for defragmentation. However, a
deterministic order can get stuck at a local minima, mandating
to include randomness in the deframengtation algorithm.
Zeng et al. presented an SA-based defragmentation mech-
anism for EONs that modiﬁes the route and/or spectrum
assignment of a randomly chosen connection [ 30]. The cost
function in [ 30] prefers a state where lightpaths have shorter
lengths, and spectrum is allocated from a lower frequency.
Conversely, we adopt a comprehensive cost function account-ing for multiple factors such as number of fragments, size of
fragments, and locations of fragments in the spectrum. We
also employ several new re-conﬁguration operations and addi-tional optimizations not considered in [ 30]. One caveat of SA
algorithm, both ours and that in [ 30], is that it requires a
large number of steps to reach a re-optimized state, making it
impractical. Therefore, we also propose an effective algorithm
that reaches a defragmented state in a limited amount of steps,which makes our approach ready to be applied in practice.
There have been some works that try to form an analytical
performance modeling of spectrum defragmentation in elas-tic optical links, such as [ 31], and [ 32] .T h ew o r ki n[ 31]
presents an analytical study of the effect of defragmenta-
tion on the connections’ blocking probability in an elasticoptical link depending on whether defragmentation is proac-
tively or reactively performed. The authors of [ 32] formulate
a Markov Chain model for characterizing the fragmentationissue in a simpliﬁed two-service elastic optical link scenario.
These works are limited to the case of a single ﬁber link,
and extending their work to attain an analytic modeling ofspectrum defragmentation in large scale EONs with splitting-
enabled technology would be a very interesting but challenging
research direction. Moreover, heuristics that require calculatinga complex fragmentation metric (such as RMSF [ 18]) would
signiﬁcantly increase the complexity of the modeling. We con-
sider such analytical modeling to be out of scope of this paper
and leave it as a potential future work direction.
There are also several papers that analyze the effect of spec-
trum defragmentation on decreasing the blocking probability
and improving the EON capacity for accepting more future
trafﬁc. Among them, [ 29] evaluates the effect of two proactive
defragmentation algorithms based on Ant Colony optimization
and Genetic metaheuristics on blocking probability overtwo different EON topologies. A survey paper [ 9] evalu-
ates and analyzes state-of-the-art fragmentation managementapproaches in terms of blocking probability by implementing
and applying those approaches in a uniﬁed simulation envi-
ronment for fair comparison. As discussed before, an impor-tant question regarding proactive defragmentation is when
to invoke the re-optimization process. However, the afore-
mentioned papers simply trigger the re-optimization processpro-actively in a periodic manner, or when speciﬁc thresholds
are exceeded (e.g., fragmentation is high). In contrast to these
works, [ 27] proposed an intelligent algorithm for time selec-
tion of the re-optimization operations. The proposed algorithm
periodically monitors the temporary blocking probability for
the previous requests in a time window whose size is purpose-
fully adjusted to cope with the changes in the trafﬁc. However,
as our experimental results will show, simply relying on a sin-gle metric for choosing the re-optimization times might lead
to a very poor performance in terms of acceptance ratio.
III. P
ROBLEM DEFINITION
A. Problem Statement
We are given an EON Gand a set of VNs Gembedded
onG.E O N G(the substrate network) consists of a set of
substrate optical nodes (SNodes) and substrate optical links
(SLinks), respectively; and a SPath is a substrate path betweentwo SNodes in the EON that can contain a sequence of SLinks.
Each VN ¯G∈G consists of a set of virtual nodes (VNodes)
¯Vand virtual links (VLinks) ¯Ewhere each VLink ¯e∈¯Ehas
a bandwidth demand b
¯e. Each VN is embedded by mapping
each of its VNodes to an EON node and each of its VLinksto a set of splits with a maximum of qsplits. Fig. 1shows
an illustrative example of the embedding of a VLink over two
splits. Each split represents a path in the EON where eachpath pis conﬁgured with a transmission conﬁguration repre-
sented by a tuple t=(d,b,m,f)∈T=(D×B×M×F)to
provide a data-rate so that the sum of data-rates is b
¯e. Here, d,
b,m, and frepresent data-rate ,baud-rate ,modulation format ,
andFEC selected from the set of possible values D,B,M,
andF, respectively. Each tuple thas a spectrum requirement
and a maximum optical reach within which tcan be used with
satisfactory signal quality as deﬁned by a reach table R[33].
The reach table Rcontains a set of tuples each of which has a
speciﬁc spectrum requirement and a maximum optical reach.
Note that the same SPath can be used multiple times as the
splits of a VLink following the reasoning in [ 8]. Also note
thatχ¯ei=(p,t,sb,st)|1≤i≤qrepresents the i-th split,
whereχ(p)
¯eiandχ(t)
¯eidenote the selected SPath and transmis-
sion conﬁguration for the i-th split, respectively. The spectrum
slot allocation for the i-th split begins at index χ(sb)
¯ei∈Sand
ends at index χ(st)
¯ei∈Salong each SLink in the SPath χ(p)
¯ei
to satisfy the spectrum contiguity constraint [ 9].
The VN embedding re-optimization problem seeks to ﬁnd
a feasible sequence of re-conﬁguration actions applied on the
VN embeddings such that the resulting embeddings of the
VNs optimize ( i.e., maximize or minimize) a certain objective
function. In our problem, the objective is to minimize network-
wide RMSF metric presented in ( 1). This metric leverages
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 10:44:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
JOHARI et al.: DRL-ASSISTED REOPTIMIZATION OF NETWORK SLICE EMBEDDING 803
TABLE I
DIFFERENT RE-CONFIGURATION ACTIONS AND CORRESPONDING COST
Fig. 1. Embedding of a virtual link over two substrate splits. Red and whiterectangles represent occupied and empty spectrum slots, respectively.
RMSF values of each EON link computed using ( 2), which
is the most comprehensive fragmentation metric [ 18]. We
assume VNode mapping to remain unchanged during the re-optimization process (typical assumption in optical network
virtualization [ 34]).
F
RMSF
net=/summationtext
e∈EFRMSFe
|E|smax
|S|(1)
FRMSF
e=smaxe|I|/radicalbigg/summationtext
i∈If2
i
|I|(2)During re-optimization, the embedding of a VLink of the
existing VNs in Gcan be re-conﬁgured one or multiple times
to reduce spectrum fragmentation. VLink re-conﬁguration con-sists in changing the VLink’s embedding, i.e., one or more
splits’ SPath (χ(p)
¯ei), tuple(χ(t)
¯ei), and spectrum allocation
(χ(sb)
¯eiand/orχ(st)
¯ei)or a combination thereof. A re-conﬁgured
split still has to satisfy spectrum contiguity and optical reach
constraints and total number of splits after re-optimization
cannot be more than q. We use 5 different re-conﬁguration
actions with different levels of disruption and their impact on
resource usage ( e.g., transponder or spectrum usage) shown
in Table I. For instance, R1in Table Imay change any or
all ofχ(t)
¯ei,χ(sb)
¯ei, andχ(st)
¯eiof a split while keeping its χ(p)
¯ei
ﬁxed, whereas R2can change all of them. Splitting offers us
new re-conﬁguration actions (R3,R4, and R5)that were not
considered in prior work. For example, we can merge two
splits into a larger one using R3/R4or divide a large split
into multiple smaller ones using R5.
All actions except R4in Table Ican be applied using make-
before-break to avoid any disruption as long as the spectrum
allocation after applying any of these actions does not overlap
with the previous spectrum allocation. Note that make-before-
break requires double committed resource for a short period of
time when it is applied. There are scenarios when the spectrum
allocation after re-conﬁguration overlaps with the allocation
present before applying the action such as for action R4in
Table I. In such scenarios, it might not be possible to apply
make-before-break , therefore, the disruption level can be sig-
niﬁcantly high. However, disruptive action such as R4may
be useful to defragment a highly utilized EON and should be
used only when necessary.
B. Pre-Computations
For each VLink ¯e∈¯E, we pre-compute Pk¯e,as e to f k
shortest paths between each pair of SNodes that a VLink’s end
VNodes have been mapped to. For each SPath p∈Pk¯e,w e
pre-compute the set of admissible transmission conﬁgurations,
T¯ep⊂T , such that each conﬁguration t∈T¯epresults in a
reach rt≥len(p)and has a data-rate t(d).T¯econtains all the
distinct tuples suitable for ¯eand is deﬁned as/uniontext
∀p∈Pk
¯eT¯ep.
IV . R E-OPTIMIZATION WITHUNBOUNDED
NUMBER OF ACTIONS
In this section, we present a Simulated Annealing [ 19]( S A )
based algorithm for solving the VN embedding re-optimization
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 10:44:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 5 ---
804 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 1, MARCH 2023
problem. SA allows us to systematically search through a solu-
tion space, while maintaining a lineage of operations startingfrom the initial network state to reach a feasible re-optimized
state. The advantage of SA is that it can avoid getting stuck at
local minima by employing random moves, and converge toa global minimum if the SA process is run for a sufﬁciently
long period of time.
A. Simulated Annealing (SA) Algorithm
SA systematically explores the neighborhood of an initial
set of embeddings of all VLinks in G(i.e.,current_state ) and
keeps reducing the fragmentation of the EON G.A neigh-
borto the current_state is another set of embeddings where
the embedding of only one VLink from the current_state is
re-conﬁgured using one of the actions presented in Table I.
SA then evaluates quality of the neighbor using our objective
function of F
RMSF
net in Eqn. ( 1) and moves to a neigh-
bor that improves FRMSF
net . It also probabilistically accepts
a worse neighbor (a re-optimized embedding with a higher
value of FRMSF
net than the current_state ) from the search neigh-
borhood. Typically, a temperature parameter (T) and energyfunction controls the probability of accepting a worse neigh-
bor. Parameter Tis set to a higher value during the initial
iterations of the search, resulting in a higher probability ofaccepting a worse neighbor. A cooling schedule attenuates the
temperature and eventually decreases the probability of accept-
ing a worse neighbor towards the end of the SA search. Byaccepting worse solutions, SA tries to avoid being stuck at a
local minimum. We run multiple iterations of the neighbor-
hood exploration procedure for each temperature to cover a
wider search space. To better explain the SA algorithm, we
deﬁne the following:
•A neighborhood generation function, which generates
a set of neighbors to the current_state and returns a
neighbor according to a policy.
•An energy function, which determines the ﬁtness of a
neighbor. It regulates the probability of accepting or
rejecting a neighbor during an iteration of SA.
•A cooling schedule, which determines how the tempera-
ture is attenuated during the search process.
1) Neighborhood Generation: We devise an algorithm
(Algorithm 1) for generating a set of neighbors to the cur-
rent_state and returning one of the neighbors. Algorithm 1
ﬁrst chooses a random split Yfrom the uniformly distributed
set of embeddings of the VLinks of current_state . Then,
Algorithm 1generates all feasible neighbors, all_neighbors ,
by applying each action from Table Ion split Y. However,
if the chosen random split belongs to a Vlink that does not
allow service disruption according to its QoS requirement,
then no neighbors from applying R4on the current state will
be generated in this process. Moreover, note that the num-
ber of feasible neighbors for a single action can be largedue to the many possible feasible spectrum re-allocation of
a split Y. Since there can be a substantial number of feasi-
ble neighbors in all_neighbors and a signiﬁcant portion of
them are not helpful for re-optimization, Algorithm 1adopts
two heuristics for keeping the most promising neighbors inAlgorithm 1: Select-Neighbor
1function Select-Neighbor (current _state,δ,Γ,Γ/prime)
2 Choose a random split Yfrom current_state
3 all_neighbors ←Generate all feasible neighbor states by
applying actions from Table Ion split Y
4 Exclude neighbor states from all_neighbors that uses ≥δ%
additional slots compared to current_state
5 sorted _neighbors ←Sort the neighbors in all_neighbor in
increasing order of their RMSF
6 neighbor _pool←Select the ﬁrst Γ%neighbors from
sorted_neighbors
7 Remove neighbors generated by R4that don’t lie in the
ﬁrstΓ/prime%ofneighbor_pool
8 max _RMSF←Maximum value of RMSF among the
neighbors in neighbor_pool
9 forneighbor ∈neighbor _pool do
10 Gainneighbor ←(RMSFneighbor −max _RMSF)2
11<neighbor ,action _spec>←A neighbor from
neighbors_pool with a probability proportional to
Gainneighbor and corresponding action
12 return<neighbor ,action _spec>
neighbor_pool . First, Algorithm 1excludes those neighbors
from all_neighbors that useδ%additional spectrum slots com-
pared to that used in split Y’s current embedding (line 4).
We callδasSlot Usage Limit . The rationale for doing so
is that a network operator may not want to increase spec-
trum usage during re-optimization and may want to move to
neighbors whose spectrum usage remains within a speciﬁedbound. Second, Algorithm 1populates a sorted list of the
remaining neighbors in all_neighbors in increasing order of
the neighbors’ F
RMSF
net values ( sorted_neighbors ) and adds
only the ﬁrst Γ% (called as Neighborhood Limit ) neighbors
from sorted_neighbors toneighbor_pool (line 6). Here, both
δandΓparameters can be tuned based on network oper-
ator policies. Moreover, as action R4has the drawback of
causing service disruption, to make sure that this action isonly chosen when it leads to a signiﬁcant decrease in the
network’s fragmentation metric, we introduce a new parameter
Γ
/primecalled Disruption Limit . We only keep neighbors generated
by action R4that lie in the ﬁrst Γ/prime%of neighbors in neigh-
bor_pool (which is also sorted based on the FRMSF
net values)
and remove all the other neighbors generated by applying R4
from neighbor_pool . In our experiments, we observed that
even setting Γ/prime= 100% led to choosing very limited num-
ber of action R4(see Fig. 6). However, if the operators desire
to further limit the number of times that action R4is chosen
in the defragmentation process, they can choose a lower value
forΓ/prime.
After generating neighbor_pool , Algorithm 1ﬁnds the
maximum value of FRMSF
net among the neighbors in neigh-
bor_pool . This value is then used to compute the relative
RMSF gain (Gain neighbor)of each of the other neighbors
inneighbor_pool ( l i n e8–9 ) . Gain neighbor is deﬁned as the
square of the difference between the neighbor’s FRMSF
net and
the maximum value of FRMSF
net . Finally, the algorithm returns
a neighbor with the probability proportional to its RMSF gain
andaction_spec , the action that generated the neighbor.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 10:44:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 6 ---
JOHARI et al.: DRL-ASSISTED REOPTIMIZATION OF NETWORK SLICE EMBEDDING 805
Algorithm 2: SA-Re-Optimize
1function SA-Re-Optimize (C,itmax,ittemp ,T0,ρ)
2 iterations ←0,T←T0
3 action _sequence ←best_sequence ←φ
4 best_state←current _state←C
5 while iterations <itmax do
6 while iterations t<ittemp do
7 current _cost←FRMSF
net(current _state)
8 <new_state,action _spec>←Select-Neighbor
(current _state,δ,Γ)
9 new_cost←FRMSF
net(new_state)
10 Δenergy=current _cost−new_cost
11 p←rand(0, 1)
12 ifΔenergy<0orp<eΔenergy /Tthen
13 current _state←new_state
14 current _cost←new_cost
15 action _sequence .append(action _spec)
16 ifcurrent _cost<best_cost then
17 best_cost←current _cost
18 best_state←current _state
19 best_sequence ←action _sequence
20 Increment iterations t
21 T=ρ∗T, Increment iterations
22 return<best_state,best_sequence >
2) Energy Function and Cooling Schedule: We use our
fragmentation metric FRMSF
net deﬁned in Eqn. ( 1)a st h e
energy function. During iteration kof SA search, the prob-
ability of moving to a neighbor is a function of energy and
temperature [ 19]. This probability is deﬁned as follows:
P(Energy,Tk)=/braceleftbigg1i f Δ Energy<0
e−ΔEnergy /Tkotherwise .
Here, Tkis the temperature at the k-th iteration and
ΔEnergy=FRMSF
net(current _state)−FRMSF
net(new_state),
where FRMSF
net(current _state)andFRMSF
net(new_state)are
energies of current_state and the neighbor returned by
Algorithm 1, respectively. We use a linear cooling sched-
ule [ 35] and set the temperature Tat iteration k+1a s :
Tk+1=ρ∗Tk, where0<ρ<1is the cooling rate (Line 21).
The SA algorithm, as outlined in Algorithm 2, takes as
input an initial state, i.e., current set of VN embedding (C),
maximum number of iterations to perform (itmax), the num-
ber of iterations to perform per temperature value (ittemp),
an initial temperature (T0)and the cooling rate (ρ).D u r i n g
each iteration for a particular temperature value, new_state
and its action_spec are generated by invoking the Select-
Neighbor procedure from Algorithm 1(line 8). Based on
the energy of the new_state and the current temperature, the
SA search moves to the new_state or not (line 11 – 15).
During the search, SA keeps track of the best state ( best_state )
and corresponding action sequence ( best_sequence ) accord-
ing to the objective function FRMSF
net . Finally, best_state and
best_sequence generated during all the iterations are returned.
V. R E-OPTIMIZATION WITHBOUNDED
NUMBER OF ACTIONS
Although the SA algorithm from Section IVis capable
of systematically exploring a large solution space, it mayrequire an excessively large number of reconﬁguration actions
to reach the re-optimized state. A long sequence of reconﬁg-uration steps can cause a long period of network instability,
rendering the SA algorithm impractical in realistic settings.
Another drawback of SA algorithm is the lack of fairnessamong the involved VLinks, i.e., some VLinks may be sub-
ject to a signiﬁcantly more number of reconﬁguration actions
than others, resulting in longer period of instability for thoseVLinks. To resolve these two limitations of the SA algorithm,
we propose a greedy algorithm that can provide a satisfactory
re-optimization performance using a bounded number of totalactions and per-VLink actions. In this section, we ﬁrst discuss
the two constraints to bound the number of actions, and then
describe how the greedy algorithm enforces these constraints.
Maximum number of actions: This bound deﬁnes the max-
imum number of actions (M
max)the re-optimization process
can take, similar to the bound proposed in [ 36]. The solu-
tion to the re-optimization problem will generate an ordered
sequence of at most Mmaxactions that lead to the best possible
re-optimized state.
Maximum number of actions per-VLink: This bound
enforces a limit on the maximum number of actions (Amax)
the re-optimization process can apply on each VLink.
Similar bounds have been applied to ensure fairness during
defragmentation of wavelength division multiplexed opticalnetworks [ 36]. Note that one could easily impose a differ-
ent bound on different VLinks to facilitate a differentiated
treatment of VLinks during re-optimization. Such differen-tial treatment can enable a variety of service level agreements
where a VLink from the highest priority class is not impacted
during re-optimization, while a VLink from best-effort class
goes through a substantially large number of re-conﬁgurations.
A. Greedy Algorithm
The greedy algorithm presented in Algorithm 3takes the
current set of VN embeddings (C), maximum number of iter-
ations to perform (it
max), number of inner iterations (itinn),
Mmax, and Amax as inputs. The greedy algorithm follows a
similar ﬂow of SA algorithm from Algorithm 2with three
major differences, while ensuring the constraints imposed by
the two bounds we discussed. First, Algorithm 3selects the
best neighbor in terms of FRMSF
net as opposed to select-
ing a neighbor chosen based on a probability distribution
in Algorithm 2. To do so, Algorithm 3invokes Best-Neighbor
procedure that returns the neighbor with the lowest value
ofFRMSF
net among the neighbors generated by applying the
actions from Table Ion a randomly selected split Y.B e s t -
Neighbor procedure is a modiﬁed version of Algorithm 1
that ﬁrst picks a random split Ywhich has been subjected
toSlot Usage Limit and has not exceeded Amax actions, and
returns the neighbor with the highest RMSF gain by apply-
ing the actions from Table Ion split Y. We do not present
Best-Neighbor procedure for the sake of brevity. If the neigh-
bor returned by Best-Neighbor procedure improves FRMSF
net
from the current_state , Algorithm 3takes the corresponding
action and moves to the neighbor state. Since Algorithm 3
selects neighbor in a greedy fashion, it can get stuck to a
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 10:44:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 7 ---
806 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 1, MARCH 2023
Algorithm 3: Greedy-Re-Optimize
1function Gr-Re-Optimize (C,itmax,itinn,Mmax,Amax)
2 iterations ←0,move _counter←0
3 action _sequence ←best_sequence ←φ
4 best_state←current _state←C
5 while iterations <itmax do
6 it_counter←0
7 while iterations t<itinndo
8 current _cost←FRMSF
net(current _state)
9 <new_state,action _spec>←Best-Neighbor
(current _state,δ,Γ)
10 new_cost←FRMSF
net(new_state)
11 ifnew_cost<current _cost then
12 it_counter←0
13 Increment move _counter
14 current _state←new_state
15 current _cost←new_cost
16 action _sequence .append(action _spec)
17 ifcurrent _cost<best_cost then
18 best_cost←current _cost
19 best_state←current _state
20 best_sequence ←action _sequence
21 ifmove _counter=Mmax then
22 return<best_state,best_sequence >
23 else
24 Increment it_counter
25 ifit_counter>no_of_splits then
26 current _state←new_state
27 current _cost←new_cost
28 action _sequence .append(action _spec)
29 Increment iterations t
30 Increment iterations
31 return<best_state,best_sequence >
local minima. To circumvent this issue, Algorithm 2has a
provision to move to a worse neighbor than the current_state
with a low probability as discussed next.
The second difference of Algorithm 3with Algorithm 2
is that Algorithm 3moves to a worse neighbor than the
current_state only when it is necessary as opposed to stochas-
tically moving to a worse neighbor in Algorithm 2. This move
is triggered when the neighbors of all the splits have worse
FRMSF
net values than FRMSF
net ofcurrent_state . This is achieved
by incrementing a counter ( it_counter ) when a worse neigh-
bor is found and comparing it_counter with total number of
splits ( no_of_splits ) in line 24 – 25. When a better neighbor
is found in a particular iteration, it_counter is reset to start
over (Line 12). Finally, Algorithm 3has a terminating condi-
tion when the number of applied actions reaches the threshold
Mmax in line 21. When such condition is reached, Algorithm 3
returns the best neighbor found during the search. Note thatwe also tried a naive greedy algorithm that chooses a split Y
on the EON link with the maximum fragmentation and does
not take a worse neighbor at any time. Such a naive greedyalgorithm gets stuck to a local minima very soon during the
search. Hence, our proposed greedy algorithm blends greedy
selection of neighbors with random choice of a split at thebeginning and has the provision of selecting a worse neighbor
when needed.VI. DRL
FOR BALANCING THE TRADE -OFFBETWEEN
NUMBER OF PERFORMED RE-OPTIMIZATION OPERATIONS
AND ACCEPTANCE RATIO
In the reoptimization process, we have a trade-off between
the performance improvement and the increase in opera-
tional complexity. In other words, invoking the re-optimizationoperations too frequently might cause unnecessary oper-
ational complexity since the re-optimization process may
involve spectrum re-conﬁguration or lightpath provision-ing/termination, while not performing the re-optimization
operation in the some crucial situations can lead to a severe
decrease in the number accepted VN requests.
For this purpose, we propose a DRL-based algorithm to
determine the timing of the re-optimization operations intel-ligently so that we can achieve a signiﬁcant improvement in
acceptance ratio while keeping the number of re-optimization
operations at a reasonable level.
In the proposed algorithm, after every Kincoming VN
requests (e.g., K=40), the DRL agent decides based on
the status of the substrate network whether to apply the re-optimization operation or not. The components of the DRL
formulation are as the following:
RL steps: step l=i∈Nis when K×iVN requests have
arrived, so each step represents arrival of KVN requests.
RL state space: the state s
l∈{ −1,+1}|E|×|S|describes
whether each spectrum slot in each SLink of the EON is occu-pied (+1) or not ( −1).|E|is the number of SLinks and |S|
is the number of spectrum slots in each SLink.
RL action space: binary action a
l∈{0,1}determines
whether in step lthe re-optimization operation should be
performed (al=1 ) or not(al=0 ) .
RL reward: we deﬁne the reward of the DRL agent to be
the acceptance ratio of the next Kincoming VN requests, plus
a negative penalty for choosing to apply the re-optimizationoperation. In this way, the agent is encouraged to balance the
trade-off between the number of performed re-optimization
operations and the overall acceptance ratio of the VN requests.So, we have r
l=δl−c×al, whereδlis the ratio of accepted
VN request between steps landl+1, and cis the chosen
penalty as the cost of performing a re-optimization operation.
RL episode: each training episode should be a certain dura-
tion of EON operation, possibly starting with an empty EON
and then allocating/deallocating VN requests that dynami-cally arrive and depart according to some speciﬁc life times.
We have described the training episode in our experiments
speciﬁcally in Section VII.
As the DRL algorithm, we choose the Soft Q-Network
(SQN) method [ 20], which is a modiﬁcation of the well-
known Deep Q-Network (DQN) method that adds an entropy
regularizer to the standard Markov Decision Process (MDP)
formulation, and is shown to be more robust, less likely tooverﬁt, more sample efﬁcient, and handles the exploit-explore
balance better than DQN [ 20], [37], [38]. Since we are deal-
ing with a discrete (binary) action space, the SQN would bea very suitable RL algorithm for our problem.
A high-level overview of the SQN’s interaction with the
EON environment is depicted in Fig. 2, and its training
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 10:44:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 8 ---
JOHARI et al.: DRL-ASSISTED REOPTIMIZATION OF NETWORK SLICE EMBEDDING 807
Fig. 2. Overview of the DRL agent’s interaction with the EON environment.
procedure is described in Algorithm 4. At each training step,
the agent observes the status of the EON’s SLinks as the cur-rent state s, and decides whether to invoke re-optimization or
not (binary action a). Then, after Kincoming VN requests, the
status of the substrate network is considered as the next state
s
/prime, and the reward value can be calculated as described before.
The experience (s,a,s/prime,r)is stored in a memory referred to
as the replay (or experience) buffer. For updating the SQN
according to the (soft) Bellmam equation, instead of only using
the latest experience, a mini-batch is sampled from the experi-ence buffer and used for updating the neural network to prevent
oscillations in the action values. This technique of using a large
buffer of past experience and sampling training data from it iscalled experience replay [ 39], and allows to learn from individ-
ual experience multiple times and in general make a better use
of experience. This procedure is repeated for the next statesand for multiple iterations (episodes) until the convergence of
the DRL agent.
VII. E
VA L UAT I O N
A. Simulation Setup
We implement the algorithms presented in Section VII-B
using C++. We consider a fully-ﬂexible EON using Nobel
Germany topology (17 nodes and 26 links) from the SNDlib
Repository (available at http://sndlib.zib.de). Each EON linkhas 4THz spectrum bandwidth divided into 160 slots of
25GHz. To emulate a live EON, we develop a discrete event
simulator. The simulator loads the EON with VNs by sim-ulating VN arrival and departure events and allocating and
releasing spectrum slots to virtual links accordingly. In our
simulator, VN arrival rate (VNR) follows a Poisson distribu-
tion with varying means (4-20 VNs per 100 time units) and
VN life time is exponentially distributed with a mean of 500time units. The number of VNodes vary from 2 to 6 and num-
ber of VLinks vary from 3 to 15 (randomly chosen). When
a VN arrives, the simulator embeds the VN using the algo-rithm proposed in [ 8]. This simulator generates snapshots of
the EON’s current occupation at different time instances inAlgorithm 4: SQN Training
1initialize the SQN weights
2foreach training episode do
3 wait for the ﬁrst KVNs to arrive
4 observe current state s
5 while episode is not ﬁnished do
6 select action aand execute it
7 wait for the next KVNs to arrive
8 calculate reward r
9 observe new state s/prime
10 add(s,a,s/prime,r)to experience buffer
11 sample mini-batch of experiences from buffer
12 for each experience in mini-batch, perform gradient
update for the SQN by the soft Bellman equation
13 update state s←s/prime
14 end of episode
15end of training
which a varying number of VNs are embedded. To analyse the
performance of the compared algorithms in terms of RMSF
reduction, we take different snapshots of the EON at different
utilizations (varying from 30% to 60%). For each network uti-
lization, we pick ﬁve random snapshots. For each snapshot, we
independently run the compared variants ﬁve times and takethe output of the run that achieves the best defragmentation.
Finally, we report the average (with maximum and minimum
as errorbars) of the best performances of each ﬁve differentsnapshots.
Then, to analyse the performance of applying re-
optimization in terms of acceptance ratio, we run a similarsimulation and after every K=40 incoming VN requests,
according to the chosen time selection strategy, we decide
whether to perform our re-optimization operation ( Gr-Re-
Optimize ) on the EON or not. We have reported the acceptance
ratio and number of re-optimization operations of different
time selection strategies in Section VII-F .
We trained the DRL agent for around 6000 episodes of only
simulations with VNR=12 (other VNR values are not used
during training). Each training episode was running the sim-
ulation for 5,000 time units; since we have VNR=12 and
K=40, around 600 VNs will arrive during the simulation
and the training episode will have around 15 RL steps (as
deﬁned in Section VI). Fig. 3shows the reward of the DRL
agent during the training episodes. We can see in the ﬁgurethat after a certain number of training episodes, the aggre-
gated reward of the DRL agent in an episode has signiﬁcantly
improved compared to the beginning where the DRL’s actionsare mostly chosen at random. This shows that the agent grad-
ually learns the most effective times to invoke re-optimization
and also not to perform too many re-optimizations due to thenegative penalty we have considered for each re-optimization
operation.
B. Compared Variants for Slice Embedding Re-Optimization
1) SA-Baseline: This variant represents SA-Re-Optimize
algorithm (Algorithm 2) with a huge number of iterations for
it
max andittemp . The values of T0= 100 andρ=0.99for
Algorithm 2are chosen as best performing ones from multiple
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 10:44:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
808 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 1, MARCH 2023
Fig. 3. Episode rewards of the DRL agent trained with the VNR12 scenario.
trials. This variant also uses Slot Usage Limit asδ= 10%
andNeighborhood Limit asΓ = 10% for Algorithm 1chosen
based on trials. SA-baseline is used to show convergence of
SA-Re-Optimize algorithm, and it provides a feasible lowerbound for the re-optimization problem.
2) SA-Re-Optimize: This variant shows the performance of
SA-Re-Optimize algorithm (Algorithm 2) with a ﬁxed number
of total iterations, i.e.,it
max= 1000 ,ittemp= 1000 and
T0= 100 andρ=0.99.
3) Gr-Bounded: This variant represents Gr-Re-Optimize
algorithm (Algorithm 3). In this case, we set Mmax= 500
and Amax=∞in Algorithm 3.W ea l s ov a r y Mmax and
Amax to show sensitivity of Algorithm 3.
4) SA-SOA: Simulated Annealing State-of-the-art (SA-
SOA) is a variant that represents the scenario where weminimize our cost function F
RMSF
net (i.e., Eqn. ( 2)) by using
the SA-based defragmentation mechanism presented in [ 30].
To the best of our knowledge the work in [ 30] is the closest
to SA-Re-Optimize algorithm (Algorithm 2). The mechanism
presented in [ 30] is not speciﬁc to any cost function, therefore,
we use our cost function instead of theirs for a fair comparison.
C. Compared Approaches for Time Selection of the
Re-Optimization Operations
1) Freq-Re-Optimize: In this approach, the re-optimization
operation is frequently performed on the EON after every
K=40 incoming VN requests. This approach yields the high-
est number of re-optimization operations in our experiments.
2) Less-Freq-Re-Optimize: This approach is a less frequent
version of Freq-Re-Optimize , where the re-optimization oper-
ation is performed on the EON after every K2>Kincoming
VN requests (e.g., K2=4×K).
3) Thr-Re-Optimize: In this approach, the re-optimization
operation is invoked whenever the RMSF metric exceeds apredeﬁned threshold value.
4) Window-Re-Optimize: In this approach, the times for
performing the re-optimization operations are chosen based
on the algorithm presented by [ 27]. In this algorithm, after
each time interval Δt, the temporary blocking probability
during the latest Δtis calculated and if it exceeds a pre-
deﬁned threshold, the re-optimization process is invoked.Moreover, after performing a re-optimization operation, based
on the behavior of the calculated blocking probabilities in the
Fig. 4. Convergence of Algorithms.
previous time intervals, Δtwill be increased or decreased to
adopt to the current status of the network.
5) DRL-Re-Optimize: In this approach, after every K=40
incoming VN requests, our trained DRL agent decides whetherto invoke the re-optimization process or not based on the
current status of the EON.
D. Performance Metrics
•RMSF Reduction: It is the reduction of fragmenta-
tion achieved by an algorithm in terms of RMSF(F
RMSF
net)from the RMSF of the given snapshot before
re-optimization. It is deﬁned as (1 - (the ratio of FRMSF
net
of the EON after re-optimization to FRMSF
net of the EON
before re-optimization)). The desired value of RMSF
Reduction is 1 but that is not practically achievable.However, the closer RMSF Reduction is to 1, the more
defragmentation is achieved through re-optimization ( e.g.,
roughly, RMSF reduction of 0.95 means that 95% frag-mentation has been reduced compared to the fragmenta-
tion before re-optimization).
•Slot Ratio: It is the ratio between the total spectrum slot
usage by the VNs after re-optimization and the total spec-
trum slot usage by the VNs before re-optimization. Slot
Ratio smaller than 1 means that spectrum occupation hasdecreased after re-optimization.
•Action Count: It is the total number of sequential actionsadopted by an algorithm to reach its re-optimized state.
•Number of Actions per VLink: It is the average number
of actions applied on each VLink by an algorithm to reach
its re-optimized state.
•Acceptance Ratio: Ratio of the number of accepted VNrequests to the total number of requests during an episodeof the simulation.
•Number of Re-optimization Operations: Total number ofperformed re-optimization operations during an episodeof the simulation.
E. Discussion of Results on RMSF Reduction
1) Comparison of Different Algorithms: Fig. 4shows that
convergence of the compared variants in terms of RMSF
(F
RMSF
net)values of the EON against number of actions for a
speciﬁc snapshot with 60% utilization. This ﬁgure shows that
SA-baseline converges to a feasible lowerbound if it is allowed
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 10:44:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
JOHARI et al.: DRL-ASSISTED REOPTIMIZATION OF NETWORK SLICE EMBEDDING 809
Fig. 5. Performance of different algorithms.
to run for a sufﬁciently long time. On the other hand, SA-Re-
Optimize does not converge to a steady value but achieves
an RMSF very close to SA-baseline ‘s lowerbound despite
being run for a ﬁxed number of iterations. Similarly, SA-SOA
diverges initially but reaches to an RMSF value closer to the
lowerbound through a large number of steps. In comparisonto SA based approaches, Gr-bounded decreases RMSF of the
EON sharply and achieves an RMSF close to SA-baseline ’s
lowerbound even by applying a limited number of actions.
Fig. 5compares different algorithms in terms of the
performance metrics introduced before. In Fig. 5(a), RMSF
reduction decreases for larger initial network utilization. Thisis rational since a highly utilized EON offers less room to
re-optimize. Fig. 5(a) also shows that SA-Re-Optimize closely
approximates SA-baseline , and both achieve great performance
by reducing more than 90% fragmentation in the given snap-
shots. On the other hand, Gr-bounded and SA-SOA achieve
lower reductions, yet reductions consistently remain within
10% of SA-baseline .Gr-bounded , despite using limited num-
ber of actions, achieves higher or equal RMSF reduction thanSA-SOA in all cases except for the snapshots with the highest
utilization (60%). Even in the constrained snapshots of high
utilization, Gr-bounded reduces more than 80% fragmentation
in the EON. If not properly designed, defragmentation algo-
rithms might lead to an increase in spectrum slot usage. Our
Fig. 6. Actions taken by different algorithms.
proposed approaches ( SA-baseline ,SA-Re-Optimize , and Gr-
bounded ) succeed instead in decreasing slot usage compared to
the slot requirement of given snapshots (see Fig. 5(b)) thanks
toSlot Usage Limit (δ)in Algorithm 1. Note instead that, in
the case of SA-SOA that does not employ any Slot Usage Limit ,
defragmentation requires more than 20% additional spectrum
slots (while this increase is avoided by our algorithms).
Note that RMSF reductions of SA based approaches ( SA-
baseline ,SA-Re-Optimize , and SA-SOA )i nF i g . 5(a) require a
huge number of re-conﬁguration actions to converge to the
most optimized ﬁnal state (see Fig. 6(a)), in the order of
100’s of thousands, which makes their application impracti-
cal in a realistic operational settings. In contrast, Gr-bounded
achieves more than 80% reduction on fragmentation with noadditional spectrum usage by employing only up to 500 re-
conﬁguration actions (on average, 2 to 3 actions per VLink),
making Gr-bounded a more practical solution to be leveraged
by a network operator. Finally, Fig. 6(b) shows the distribution
of different actions from Table Iadopted by SA-Re-Optimize ,
SA-SOA , and Gr-bounded . According to this ﬁgure, usage of
action R
1comprises the major percentages, while the proposed
re-conﬁguration actions (R3−R5)have been used in more
than 20% cases of SA-Re-Optimize andGr-bounded .W ea l s o
observe that the action R4which causes disruption has been
used very rarely in case of Gr-bounded .
2) Analysis of Gr-Bounded: Fig. 7shows the impact
of varying Mmax (Maximum number of actions) on the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 10:44:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 11 ---
810 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 1, MARCH 2023
Fig. 7. Performance of Gr-bounded by varying Mmax .
performance of Gr-bounded with Amax=∞and for dif-
ferent values of initial network utilization. Fig. 7also com-
pares the performance of Gr-bounded having different Mmax
bounds with the best possible re-optimized state that could
be achieved by SA-Re-Optimize in limited number of steps
(Mmax= 1000) .F i g . 7(a) shows that Gr-bounded , even with
the smallest Mmax(Mmax= 100) achieves 20-30% more
defragmentation than the SA-Re-Optimize with Mmax= 1000 .
We also observe that SA-Re-Optimize with Mmax= 1000
could not even reduce RMSF more than 50% in any case. The
reason for such poor initial performance of SA-Re-Optimize
is that it allows to move to a worse neighbor with a high
probability during the initial stages of SA search that diverges
SA-Re-Optimize within Mmax= 1000 actions. Such behav-
ior is fundamental to the SA algorithm and, for this reason,
SA-Re-Optimize cannot be used in a practical setting where
the number of actions is limited. Another takeaway fromFig. 7is that RMSF reduction of Gr-bounded increases dras-
tically when the value of M
max goes from 100 to 300 and
RMSF reduction stabilizes for Mmax≥500. This justiﬁes
our choice of Mmax= 500 for the other evaluations of Gr-
bounded . Finally, Fig. 7(b) shows that Gr-bounded applies
on average one action to each VLink when Mmax is low
(Mmax= 100) .F o r SA-Re-Optimize , we keep the best re-
optimized state within Mmax= 1000 that can be reached with
lower number of actions per VLink. After reaching the best re-
optimized state, SA-Re-Optimize diverges to worse solutions,
Fig. 8. Performance of Gr-bounded by varying Amax .
and hence we ignore those actions justifying the lower num-
ber of per-VLink actions. This ﬁgure also shows that averagenumber of actions per VLink increases with the increase in
M
max and decreases when network utilization increases. This
is due to the fact that, as utilization increases, snapshots havemore VLinks, and the same total number of actions are dis-
tributed among more VLinks thus reducing number of actions
per VLink.
Let us now discuss the impact of varying A
max (Maximum
number of actions per-VLink) on the performance of Gr-
bounded with Mmax= 500 and for different values of
initial network utilization. Recall from Section V,Amax=x
means that a VLink can go through at most xnumber of
re-conﬁguration actions during the whole re-optimization pro-cess. Fig. 8(a) shows that Gr-bounded with A
max=1
achieves the lowest RMSF reduction as it allows a single
re-conﬁguration action for all the splits of a VLink. Such aconservative version of Gr-bounded still reduces more than
60% fragmentation using the smallest number of actions as
s h o w ni nF i g . 8(b). As we loosen the constraint of A
max
(by increasing its value), a VLink can be re-conﬁgured more
than once offering more opportunities to re-optimize. Hence,RMSF reduction increases for increasing A
max. Such gain
is more prominent for smaller values of Amax while smaller
increases in RMSF reduction are observed for Amax≥6.
This is due to the fact that the other limit of Maximum num-
ber of actions (Mmax= 500) dominates in Gr-bounded for
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 10:44:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 12 ---
JOHARI et al.: DRL-ASSISTED REOPTIMIZATION OF NETWORK SLICE EMBEDDING 811
Amax≥6. Similar observations apply to the total number of
actions in Fig. 8(b). Another takeaway from Fig. 8( b )i st h a t
action count increases with the increase in utilization of snap-
shots. This is expected as a snapshot with higher utilization
has more VLinks that requires more actions to be applied.
F . Discussion of Results on Different Re-Optimization Time
Selection Strategies
Fig. 9shows the acceptance ratio and number of re-
optimization operations of different time selection approachesfor different values of VNR. As shown in Fig. 9(a), applying
the greedy re-optimization operation on the network ( Freq-Re-
Optimize ) leads to considerable improvement in the acceptance
ratio compared to the case with no re-optimization, and this
improvement is more signiﬁcant for lower VN arrival rates(8% for VNR=20 and 15% for VNR=4). This shows that
there is a high correlation between the fragmentation level
(RMSF) of the EON and its capability to accept more traf-ﬁc, and reducing RMSF is a very suitable indirect approach
for increasing the acceptance ratio when there is no priori
knowledge of the future VN requests.
Moreover, we can see that the acceptance ratio of our
proposed DRL-Re-Optimize is very close to the Freq-Re-
Optimize case, while performing much fewer re-optimization
operations (one-third on average, as shown in Fig. 9(b)). This
means that our RL algorithm has successfully detected the
most crucial moments for performing the re-optimization pro-cess to achieve a high degree of performance improvement
with limited number of re-optimization operations. Moreover,
the ﬁgure shows that other time selection strategies with
similar number of re-optimization operations as our RL
algorithm (namely, Less-Freq-Re-Optimize ,Thr-Re-Optimize ,
and Window-Re-Optimize ) have a much lower acceptance
ratio than our RL-based algorithm. Among the compared
approaches, Window-Re-Optimize has the worst performance,
since it considers the blocking probability in the latest time
window as the metric for estimating the level of fragmentation
in the network, while blocking probability depends also on theoverall link utilization of the EON. As a result, this method
can lead to only invoking the re-optimization when the over-
all link utilization is high, which might not be the optimumstrategy. Furthermore, Thr-Re-Optimize has a slightly better
performance than Less-Freq-Re-Optimize , because it takes into
account the RMSF metric for determining the right timesfor performing re-optimization, as opposed to Less-Freq-Re-
Optimize that simply invokes the operations in ﬁxed intervals.
As we mentioned earlier, the DRL agent for this evaluation isonly trained in simulations with VNR=12, however, we can
see in Fig. 9that it performs well for other VNR cases that
have not been seen during training as well. We will evaluate
the generalization capability of our DRL algorithm in the next
section with more details and experiments.
G. Generalization Capability of the DRL Algorithm
Since real-life application scenarios might be different than
our simulation environment, we would desire a generalizable
Fig. 9. Performance of different time selection strategies for different VNRs.
DRL agent that does not overﬁt on the speciﬁc characteris-tics of our training environment, and is applicable to different
scenarios that differ in distribution from those generated inour training setup. To analyze this aspect of our proposed
algorithm, we evaluate the DRL agent on scenarios that were
unseen during training, both in terms of VNR value andlife-time distribution, as described below:
1) Different VNR Values: We already showed in Section
VII-C that the DRL agent trained only with the VNR 12 case
performed well on other VNR scenarios. For further evalu-
ation, here, we have trained two other DRL agents trained
with VNR 4 and VNR 20 scenarios (named RL4 and RL20)
and reported their performance on different VNR cases in
Table II. We can see that for each VNR case, the agent that is
trained speciﬁcally for that VNR case has the highest accep-tance ratio (e.g., RL12 and VNR 12). However, the degradation
in their performance for VNR cases that differ from the one
they were trained for seems to be insigniﬁcant, specially forRL12 and RL20 agents. For example, the difference in accep-
tance ratio of RL12 and RL20 in different cases never exceeds
0.5%. However, we can see that the RL4 agent has a slightly
worse performance compared to the other two agents, since
the number of steps in each episode of training RL4 is much
smaller than the other two agents. Therefore, we can argue thatagents trained with high VNR values are more generalizable
in comparison.
2) Different Life-Time Distributions: In Fig. 10,w eh a v e
trained a DRL agent with VNR 12 scenario and exponential
life-time distribution with a mean of 500 time units, and we
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 10:44:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 13 ---
812 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 1, MARCH 2023
TABLE II
ACCEPTANCE RATIO (A.R.) AND NUMBER OF RE-OPTIMIZATION
OPERATIONS (#O PER.)OFRL A GENTS TRAINED WITHDIFFERENT VNR
SCENARIOS EV ALUATED IN DIFFERENT VNR C ASES (E.G.,RL4ISA N
AGENT THAT ISONLY TRAINED WITHVNR 4SCENARIO )
Fig. 10. Performance of different time selection strategies for VNR 4a n d
different life-time distributions.
are evaluating the agent in scenarios with VNR 4 and different
life-time distribution, namely an exponential distribution with
a mean of 300 time units, an exponential distribution with a
mean of 700 time units, and a Gamma distribution with shape
argument of 0.2 and scale argument of 1600, that simulates ascenario where most of the life times are concentrated around a
low value while a few outliers are signiﬁcantly higher than this
value. So, in these experiments, both the VNR value and life-time distribution are different from the training environment.
We can see in the ﬁgure that the DRL method still has a higher
acceptance ratio compared to other approaches that have thesame number of re-optimization operations.
VIII. C
ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have addressed the re-optimization of
network slice embedding over EON with the objective to min-
imize spectrum fragmentation. Given an EON with a set ofembedded VNs, the problem is to re-optimize the existing VN
embeddings by employing a series of different re-conﬁgurationactions. We advance the state-of-the-art by addressing, for
the ﬁrst time, the spectrum defragmentation problem in thecontext of splitting-enabled EON and by proposing novel
re-conﬁguration actions that offer more opportunities to re-
optimize. Given the complex and non-linear nature of thisproblem, we have proposed simulated annealing based algo-
rithm for systematically exploring its large solution space. We
also propose a greedy search mechanism to address the prac-tical constraint to limit the number of re-conﬁguration steps
taken to reach a ﬁnal defragmentated state. For improving the
number of accepted VN request through a reasonable numberof re-optimization operations, we proposed a DRL-based algo-
rithm to determine the most effective moments for invoking
re-optimization.
Our extensive simulation results demonstrate that the sim-
ulated annealing based algorithm reduces more than 90%fragmentation at the expense of employing a huge number re-
conﬁguration actions. Our results also show that the proposed
greedy search algorithm, if we consider a scenario with limitednumber of re-conﬁguration actions, achieves better defragmen-
tation (reduces more than 80% fragmentation) than a prior
approach that employs simulated annealing. The greedy searchalgorithm can impose different level of bounds on the number
of actions to be taken, enabling a fair or prioritized treat-
ment of VLinks during re-optimization. Moreover, our resultsshow that, when the number of admissible reconﬁguration
action is limited ( e.g., below 500), having the possibility to
exploit a comprehensive set of reconﬁguration actions (involv-ing merging and dividing splits of a virtual link) allows to
achieve noticeable improvement in defragmentation. We also
evaluated the effect of our proposed greedy re-optimization
algorithm on increasing the network ability to accept more
trafﬁc where the times of the re-optimization operations werechosen according to different strategies. We showed that our
proposed DRL-based method outperformed the existing time
selection methods with the same number of re-optimizationoperations up to 23% in acceptance ratio.
R
EFERENCES
[1] B. Yan et al., “Tidal-trafﬁc-aware routing and spectrum allocation in
elastic optical networks,” IEEE/OSA J. Opt. Commun. Netw. , vol. 10,
no. 11, pp. 832–842, Nov. 2018.
[2] M. Hadi, M. R. Pakravan, and E. Agrell, “Dynamic resource allocation
in metro elastic optical networks using Lyapunov drift optimization,” J.
Opt. Commun. Netw. , vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 250–259, Jun. 2019.
[3] Z. Zhong et al., “Provisioning short-term trafﬁc ﬂuctuations in elas-
tic optical networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. , vol. 27, no. 4,
pp. 1460–1473, Aug. 2019.
[4] X. Foukas, G. Patounas, A. Elmokashﬁ, and M. K. Marina, “Network
slicing in 5G: Survey and challenges,” IEEE Commun. Mag. , vol. 55,
no. 5, pp. 94–100, May 2017.
[5] S. Aleksic, “Towards ﬁfth-generation (5G) optical transport networks,”
inProc. ICTON , 2015, pp. 1–4.
[6] R. Boutaba, N. Shahriar, and S. Fathi, “Elastic optical networking for
5G transport,” J. Netw. Syst. Manag. , vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 819–847, 2017.
[7] L. Gong and Z. Zhu, “Virtual optical network embedding (VONE) over
elastic optical networks,” J. Lightw. Technol. , vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 450–460,
Feb. 1, 2014.
[8] N. Shahriar et al., “Achieving a fully-ﬂexible virtual network embed-
ding in elastic optical networks,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM , 2019,
pp. 1756–1764.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 10:44:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
JOHARI et al.: DRL-ASSISTED REOPTIMIZATION OF NETWORK SLICE EMBEDDING 813
[9] B. C. Chatterjee, S. Ba, and E. Oki, “Fragmentation problems and
management approaches in elastic optical networks: A survey,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tuts. , vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 183–210, 1st Quart., 2018.
[10] H. Beyranvand, M. Maier, and J. A. Salehi, “An analytical framework
for the performance evaluation of node-and network-wise operation sce-
narios in elastic optical networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 62, no. 5,
pp. 1621–1633, May 2014.
[11] V . Mnih et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement
learning,” Nature , vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015.
[12] V . Mnih et al., “Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning,”
inProc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. , 2016, pp. 1928–1937.
[13] Y . Ujjwal and J. Thangaraj, “Review and analysis of elastic optical
network and sliceable bandwidth variable transponder architecture,” Opt.
Eng., vol. 57, no. 11, 2018, Art. no. 110802.
[14] A. Pagès, J. Perelló, S. Spadaro, and J. Comellas, “Optimal route,
spectrum, and modulation level assignment in split-spectrum-enabled
dynamic elastic optical networks,” IEEE/OSA J. Opt. Commun. Netw. ,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 114–126, Feb. 2014.
[15] F. Cugini et al., “Push-pull defragmentation without trafﬁc disruption
in ﬂexible grid optical networks,” J. Lightw. Technol. , vol. 31, no. 1,
pp. 125–133, Jan. 1, 2013.
[16] R. Proietti et al., “Rapid and complete hitless defragmentation method
using a coherent RX LO with fast wavelength tracking in elastic opticalnetworks,” Opt. Exp. , vol. 20, no. 24, pp. 26958–26968, 2012.
[17] T. Takagi, H. Hasegawa, K.-I. Sato, Y . Sone, A. Hirano, and M. Jinno,
“Disruption minimized spectrum defragmentation in elastic optical path
networks that adopt distance adaptive modulation,” in Proc. ECOC ,
2011, pp. 1–3.
[18] P. Lechowicz, M. Tornatore, A. Wlodarczyk, and K. Walkowiak,
“Fragmentation-aware algorithm with bordering super-channels in spec-trally/spatially ﬂexible optical networks,” IEEE/OSA J. Opt. Commun.
Netw. , vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 133–145, May 2020.
[19] E. H. L. Aarts and J. Korst, Simulated Annealing and Boltzmann
Machines . Chichester, U.K.: Wiley, 1988.
[20] T. Haarnoja, H. Tang, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Reinforcement learning
with deep energy-based policies,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. , 2017,
pp. 1352–1361.
[21] S. Taeb et al., “Reoptimizing network slice embedding on EON-enabled
transport networks,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Netw. Serv. Manag. (CNSM) ,
2021, pp. 292–300.
[22] J. Comellas, L. Vicario, and G. Junyent, “Proactive defragmentation in
elastic optical networks under dynamic load conditions,” Photon. Netw.
Commun. , vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 26–34, 2018.
[23] S. Shakya, N. Pradhan, X. Cao, Z. Ye, and C. Qiao, “Virtual network
embedding and reconﬁguration in elastic optical networks,” in Proc.
IEEE GLOBECOM , 2014, pp. 2160–2165.
[24] M. Zhu, S. Zhang, Q. Sun, G. Li, B. Chen, and J. Gu, “Fragmentation-
aware VONE in elastic optical networks,” J. Opt. Commun. Netw. ,
vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 809–822, Sep. 2018.
[25] S. Fernández-Martínez, B. Barán, and D. P. Pinto-Roa, “Spectrum
defragmentation algorithms in elastic optical networks,” Opt. Switch.
Netw. , vol. 34, pp. 10–22, Nov. 2019.
[26] R. Wang and B. Mukherjee, “Provisioning in elastic optical networks
with non-disruptive defragmentation,” J. Lightw. Technol. , vol. 31,
no. 15, pp. 2491–2500, Aug. 1, 2013.
[27] M. Zhang, C. You, H. Jiang, and Z. Zhu, “Dynamic and adaptive band-
width defragmentation in spectrum-sliced elastic optical networks with
time-varying trafﬁc,” J. Lightw. Technol. , vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 1014–1023,
Mar. 1, 2014.
[28] S. Shakya and X. Cao, “Spectral defragmentation in elastic optical path
networks using independent sets,” in Proc. Natw. Fiber Opt. Eng. Conf. ,
2013, pp. 1–3.
[29] E. J. Dávalos, M. F. Romero, S. M. Galeano, D. A. Báez,
A. Leiva, and B. Baran, “Spectrum defragmentation in elastic optical
networks: Two approaches with metaheuristics,” IEEE Access ,v o l .7 ,
pp. 119835–119843, 2019.
[30] Y . Zeng, N. Hua, X. Zheng, H. Zhang, B. Zhou, and Y . Cao,
“Defragmentation of ﬂexible optical networks based on simulated
annealing,” in Proc. IEEE ACP , 2012, pp. 1–3.
[31] S. K. Singh, W. Bziuk, and A. Jukan, “Analytical performance modeling
of spectrum defragmentation in elastic optical link networks,” Opt.
Switch. Netw. , vol. 24, pp. 25–38, Apr. 2017.
[32] J. Kim, S. Yan, A. Fumagalli, E. Oki, and N. Yamanaka, “An analytical
model of spectrum fragmentation in a two-service elastic optical link,”
inProc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM) , 2015, pp. 1–6.[33] T. Ahmed et al., “Dynamic routing, spectrum, and modulation-format
allocation in mixed-grid optical networks,” IEEE/OSA J. Opt. Commun.
Netw. , vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 79–88, May 2020.
[34] G. Zhang, M. De Leenheer, A. Morea, and B. Mukherjee, “A survey on
OFDM-based elastic core optical networking,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
Tuts. , vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 65–87, 1st Quart., 2013.
[35] S. B. Masti and S. V . Raghavan, “Simulated annealing algorithm for
virtual network reconﬁguration,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Euro-NF Conf. Next
Gener. Internet , 2012, pp. 95–102.
[36] H. Duong, B. Jaumard, D. Coudert, and R. Armolavicius, “Efﬁcient
make before break capacity defragmentation,” in Proc. IEEE HPSR ,
2018, pp. 1–6.
[37] N. Vieillard, O. Pietquin, and M. Geist, “Munchausen reinforcement
learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. , vol. 33,
2020, pp. 4235–4246.
[38] T. Haarnoja, V . Pong, A. Zhou, M. Dalal, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine,
“Composable deep reinforcement learning for robotic manipulation,” inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA) , 2018, pp. 6244–6251.
[39] L.-J. Lin, “Self-improving reactive agents based on reinforcement learn-
ing, planning and teaching,” Mach. Learn. , vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 293–321,
1992.
Seyed Soheil Johari (Graduate Student Member,
IEEE) received the B.Sc. degree in electrical engi-neering from the Sharif University of Technology in2020. He is a Graduate Researcher with the David
R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University
of Waterloo. His research focuses on the applicationof machine learning techniques for data-driven man-agement and orchestration of 5G network slices. He
was a recipient of the Best Student Paper Award at
IEEE/IFIP NOMS 2022.
Sepehr Taeb received the B.Sc. degree in com-
puter engineering from the Sharif University of
Technology in 2016, and the M.Math. degree incomputer science from the University of Waterlooin 2019, where he is a Research Assistant with the
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science.
His research interests include network virtualization,optical networks, and Internet of Drones.
Nashid Shahriar (Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree from the School of Computer Science,University of Waterloo in 2020. He is an AssistantProfessor with the Department of Computer Science,
University of Regina. His research interests include
network virtualization, 5G network slicing, andnetwork reliability. He was a recipient of the 2020
Ph.D. Alumni Gold Medal, the 2021 Mathematics
Doctoral Prize, the Ontario Graduate Scholarship,the President’s Graduate Scholarship, and theDavid R. Cheriton Graduate Scholarship with the
University of Waterloo. His research received several recognitions, including
the IEEE/IFIP NOMS 2022 Best Student Paper Award, the IFIP/IEEE IM2021 Best Ph.D. Dissertation Award, the IEEE/ACM/IFIP CNSM 2019 BestPaper Award, the IEEE NetSoft 2019 Best Student Paper Award, and the
IEEE/ACM/IFIP CNSM 2017 Best Paper Award.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 10:44:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
814 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 1, MARCH 2023
Shihabur Rahman Chowdhury (Student Member,
IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in computer sci-ence from the University of Waterloo in 2021. He iscurrently a Senior Software Engineer with the Apple
Knowledge Platform. His research interests include
various aspects of building and managing networksand large-scale distributed systems. His Ph.D. dis-sertation “Resource Management in Softwarized
Networks” was recognized by the 2021 University of
Waterloo Alumni Gold Medal (Ph.D.) and the 2022IEEE/IFIP NOMS 2022 Best Dissertation Award.
His contributions to the network management research has received several
recognitions, including the 2021 IEEE CNOM Young Professional Award,and the Best Paper Awards at IEEE/ACM/IFIP CNSM 2019, IEEE NetSoft2019, and IEEE/ACM/IFIP CNSM 2017 conferences.
Massimo Tornatore (Fellow, IEEE) is an Associate
Professor with the Politecnico di Milano, Italy. Healso held an appointment as an Adjunct Professorwith the University of California at Davis, Davis,
USA, and as a Visiting Professor with the University
of Waterloo, Canada. He coauthored more than400 conference and journal papers (with 19 bestpaper awards) and the recent Handbook of Optical
Networks (Springer). His research interests include
performance evaluation and design of commu-nication networks (with an emphasis on optical
networking), and machine learning application for network management. He
is a member of the editorial board of IEEE C
OMMUNICATION SURVEYS AND
TUTORIALS , IEEE C OMMUNICATION LETTERS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT , and IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS
ONNETWORKING .
Raouf Boutaba (Fellow, IEEE) received the M.Sc.
and Ph.D. degrees in computer science fromSorbonne University in 1990 and 1994, respectively.
He is currently a University Chair Professor and
the Director of the David R. Cheriton School ofComputer Science, University of Waterloo, Canada.He also holds an INRIA International Chair in
France. His research interests include resource and
service management in networks and distributedsystems. He was the Founding Editor-in-Chief of
the IEEE T
RANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND
SERVICE MANAGEMENT from 2007 to 2010 and is the current Editor-in-
Chief of the IEEE J OURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS .
He is a Fellow of the Engineering Institute of Canada, the Canadian Academy
of Engineering, and the Royal Society of Canada.
Jeebak Mitra received the M.A.Sc. and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical engineering from TheUniversity of British Columbia in 2005 and 2010,respectively. From 2010 to 2011, he was a Senior
System Engineer with Riot Micro, leading the
system-level design for a local thermal equilibriumbaseband. From 2011 to 2012, he was a TeamLeader for physical-layer DSP design with BLINQ
Networks, Ottawa, focusing on small-cell backhaul
products. Since 2013, he has been a SeniorStaff Engineer with Huawei Technologies Canada
Research Center, Ottawa, in the areas of algorithm design and implementation
for coherent high-speed optical transceivers and ﬂexible optical networks.His research interests lie in the area of high-performance communicationsystems design focusing on optical and wireless networks. He received the
Best Student Paper Award at the IEEE Canadian Conference in Electrical
and Computer Engineering 2009. He was a co-recipient of the Best PaperAward at IEEE/ACM/IFIP CNSM 2017 and 2019.
Mahdi Hemmati (Member, IEEE) received the
M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering—systems and
control from the Sharif University of Technology,
Iran, in 2003, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical andcomputer engineering from the University of Ottawain 2017. He is currently a Senior Staff Engineer
with Huawei Technologies Canada Research Center,
Ottawa. His research interests include distributedcontrol and optimization, fair resource allocation,and reinforcement learning applications in network
automation. He was a recipient of the NSERC
Postgraduate Scholarship during his doctoral studies. He was a co-recipientof the Best Paper Award at IEEE/ACM/IFIP CNSM 2019.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Hanoi University of Science & Technology. Downloaded on April 15,2026 at 10:44:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 